1.	Outlook for Russian Oil
1.1	Introduction
The longer-term outlook for Russian oil production is extremely uncertain. The lEA’s World Energy Outlook 2022 postulates a 2 mmbpd drop for Russia’s oil production by 2030 in their STEPs scenario. However, the only supporting analysis for this assumption in WEO 2022 (the latest WEO where oil production is discussed in country detail) is a short paragraph that states:
“Russia has been under sanctions since 2014 but the financial and technology restrictions bite much harder now. As access to technologies, oil field service expertise, equipment and assets is removed, Russia struggles to maintain production in existing fields and to develop large new fields in the Arctic, tight oil, and other offshore areas” .
This set of assertions, however, is no substitute for the analysis of the factors that have governed the dynamics of Russia’s oil production to date and the evaluation of how these might change in the future.
The obvious lines of investigation should attempt to answer the following questions:
•	Are there reserves constraints on Russia’s future production growth?
•	Where is most of Russian oil going to be produced out to the 2030s, and does Russia need to rely on the high-cost and technically challenging areas in the Arctic offshore and the Bazhenov suite (a tight oil formation in Western Siberia) to maintain its oil output during the next decade?
•	What role will Russia’s tax policies play in addressing the risk of an oil production fall?
•	What equipment will Russia need to manage the production declines at its producing fields and how critical are sanctions in this regard?
•	Which specific projects is Russia planning to implement to produce “new” oil in the next decade and are there critical dependencies on Western technology?
Each of these questions merits fundamental research. This note will merely highlight the key points.
1.2	Russian oil reserves
The first thing to note is that Russia is one of the world’s “big three” oil producers (along with the US and Saudi Arabia) and has vast oil reserves and resources. According to the 2023 edition of the Energy Institute’s Statistical Review of World Energy 2023, Russia’s proved reserves as of the end of 2020 amounted to 108 billion barrels (representing 6.2 per cent share of global reserves) with a reserve to production ratio of 28 years.
Russia’s methodology of reserves calculation differs from the Western system by putting greater emphasis on technical recoverability of reserves rather than the economic efficiency of doing so (under the prevailing market prices at the moment of assessment). According to Russia’s Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR), as of January 1,2021, Russia’s oil and condensate reserves under the A+B1+C1 categories (which roughly correspond to proven and probable categories in the Western methodology) constituted 19,010.4 million tonnes and 2,242.4 million tonnes, respectively , equivalent to an overall total of 156 billion barrels.
For 2020, the MNR assessed a recovery factor for oil under these categories of reserves in Russia at 37.1 per cent. This methodology thus suggests a “cover” of about 16 years from what essentially are fields under development and assessment. The estimates of oil resources for Russia that might underpin new discoveries in the future run as high as 55,800 million tonnes for oil and 13,100 million tonnes for condensate. The bottom line: Russia is not going to run out of oil for many decades and there is a tremendous potential for additional giant discoveries, but these are most likely in the Arctic offshore (See Figure 4).
Regarding the geographical distribution of Russia’s oil reserves, there are several oil basins, including the “older” oil provinces in the North Caucasus and in the South, very mature production in the Volga region that has been under development since the 1930-40s, the most prolific and mature Western Siberia, under development since the 1960-70s, and the “newer” Timan-Pechora in the northwest of the country, Eastern Siberia and Far East oil provinces, where large-scale oil production mostly started in the 1990s-early 2000s.
Western Siberia is the core region, containing most of the country’s oil reserves and accounting for the lion’s share of Russia’s liquids output. Khanty-Mansiysk autonomous okrug or KhMAO is home to Russia’s largest oil fields, whereas Yamal-Nenetsk autonomous okrug or YaNAO is home to Russia’s super-giant gas fields, and, consequently, to the largest condensate reserves in the country.
The available Russian statistics on the rates of depletion of the oil reserves by region is organized by the federal district, not by oil basin, which complicates the analysis (See Figure 5).
The overall conclusion, however, is that the remaining reserves will allow Western Siberia (located within the administrative borders of the Urals Federal District) to hold its position as the core of the Russian oil industry for decades to come, especially if modern production techniques are used. The older oil provinces would be able to maintain production at lower levels for many years, and new contributions to growth are likely to come primarily from the current periphery of the Western Siberian oil province in the Krasnoyarsk region and from Eastern Siberia, from fields that are logistically challenging but are conventional from the upstream development perspective. Russia does not need to develop new high-cost oil from tight formations or from the Arctic offshore for the next twenty years unless future market conditions justify the need for Russia to grow its total oil output aggressively. Given the predominance of peak oil demand theories and the policies of moving away from fossil fuels as part of the global energy transition agenda, this is unlikely to be the case.
1.3	Russia’s fiscal policies: systematic upstream incentives at last
The most important above-ground factor for the future of Russia’s oil output is taxation. Since the early 2000s, the Russian government has been using fiscal instruments that have relied on taxing gross revenues of the Russian oil producers - the so-called Mineral Extraction Resource Tax (MRET) and the export duty (export tax). From the Russian state’s perspective, the administrative simplicity of these levies represented a clear advantage. The potential downside was that these levies did not take costs into account and thus could be detrimental for high-cost projects.
To account for oil price fluctuations and to tax windfall price revenues, sliding scale formulae for both MRET and export tax were introduced, linked to the price of Urals crude in international markets. When oil prices were high, state tax take would go up, to a maximum of about 90%, and when oil prices were low, it would decline to shield producers and secure their minimum operating margins. So long as the legacy of Soviet era investments could be run down, this was a second-best but reasonably rational tradeoff for Russian planners to choose, and indeed the tax system has worked reasonably well and survived the oil price crashes in 2009, 2015 and 2020.
Mineral royalties are, however, usually site specific. The philosophy of the Russian MRET when it was introduced in the early 2000s was of a “one-size-fits-all” tax, but over time the Russian tax administrators had to accept the reality: an oil production tax should reflect the differences in project economics that are a function of site-specific mineral rents. The flip side of relying on a gross revenue type of taxation for Russian oil has been its negative impact on the economics of many Russian brownfields and also on new big-ticket projects. From a project development perspective, the tax burden was all front-end loaded, and the distribution of risks favored the state over the producers.
Russia’s fiscal authorities had been reluctant to embrace the idea of a full-scale transition to oil taxes that would be sensitive to costs or profits (a few early production sharing agreements (PSAs) are the exceptions that prove the general rule) for fear of tax base manipulation by oil companies. At the same time, ad hoc state interventions to address the problems of non-performing oil fields were increasing and numerous exemptions and rate reductions to MRET had flourished in Russia during the 2010s. These were primarily addressing the situations at depleted fields, and also new fields in regions that were lacking developed infrastructure. As Russia’s production base was deteriorating and more new fields were brought into production, the share of assets that had different MRET exemptions reached almost 60 percent by 2020. Moreover, Russia’s Ministry of Finance was concerned that by 2035 the output with reduced rates of MRET would reach 90 percent of the total.
The so-called Additional Profits Tax (APT), a cash flow-based alternative to MRET for certain fields was introduced in Russia on January 1,2019, initially with limited application to a few pilot projects. In 2021 it was finally moved from the pilot stage to more general application. The income tax rate was set at 50% after deducting production and transportation costs and this should significantly reduce tax terms for mature fields, while taxes for new fields would be slightly improved as well .
In 2021 the collected APT reached $13.7 billion and accounted for 11 percent of all collected oil and gas federal taxes. In 2022 these increased to $24.7 billion and 15 percent. (See Figure 6)
The Russian government’s ability to be flexible and to recognize the need for providing incentives to the oil producers has been a vital element of oil production growth in Russia in the past decade. The good news from the perspective of the Russian industry is that a systemic solution in the form of APT has finally replaced a practice of ad hoc exemptions. This is a definite improvement from a long-term planning perspective for the Russian oil developers.
1.4	“New Oil” versus “Old Oil”
In the past twenty years Russian oil companies have achieved very good results in managing the decline rates of the so-called “old” oil in Russia and have been consistently adding new capacity.
Russia’s oil industry is relatively mature. One indicator of this maturity is that most Russian liquid hydrocarbon production comes from “older” fields. For example, fields that have been in production for more than five years accounted for 95.7% of Russia’s total liquids production in 2022. Many of these fields passed their peak production phase some time ago and have been in a natural production decline for many years. It is noteworthy that in the Russian statistics "new" fields are defined as those put into operation fewer than five years earlier; the field composition changes with each passing year. The fluctuations in the category of “new” oil are often due to the departure of major fields from this category, as was the case in 2015 when the Vankor’s field production passed the five-year threshold and the output by other new fields was insufficient to compensate for the fallout. At the same time, the series since 2000 suggests that Russia has been able to develop and add to its overall portfolio of new fields very consistently suggesting sustainable investments in new productive capacity (see Figure 7).
The bulk of activity, however, happens at mature fields. At the end of 2022 there were 158.8 thousand producing wells in Russia. After idling lots of wells in 2020 as part of the cuts agreed with OPEC, Russia brought most of them back into production and also developed new ones at a high rate in 2021 and 2022. It is universally accepted that drilling volumes represent one of the most reliable among the readily available indicators of the near-term future production. The data for 2022 demonstrates a significant increase in development drilling that resulted in production growth that year (See Table 1).
Moreover, the development drilling volumes were robust throughout 2022 (See Figure 8)
The data on the composition of producing wells by method of extraction in Russia in 2021 (the latest year for which this statistic is available) demonstrates that most of the methods are very traditional. The bulk of extraction in Western Siberia involves water flooding and extensive use of submersible electric pumps. The Volga region producers typically use sucker rod pumps. The related equipment is produced in Russia (see Table 2).
1.5	Western sanctions and technological dependency of the Russian oil sector
The role of Western technology in Russia’s oil sector must be put in proper context. Western service companies have been instrumental in rationalizing field modelling and drilling practices in Russia. But they have always worked in close partnership with the Russian oil companies that have developed their own fit-for-purpose solutions and talent. Many Russian majors have relied on in-house service teams, using the Russian affiliates of the Western service companies only for the most challenging tasks.
The “miracle” in Western Siberian oil fields in the early 2000s is a case in point. The collapse of the Soviet Union and its command economy had a corollary in dwindling oil output at the Russian oil fields in the first half of the 1990s, followed by a stabilization at circa 60% of the 1990 level in the second half of the decade. Lack of investment during this period resulted in high natural decline rates at the fields not being offset by enhanced recovery measures or new field development. By the end of the 1990s Western Siberia seemed to be written off as a future growth prospect.
But instead, what happened in the Russian oil patch (primarily in Western Siberia) during the five years after 1999 was nothing short of a miracle, as national output increased from 6.2 mmbpd in 1999 to 9.2 mmbpd in 2004, up 50% for the period. Thane Gustafson, the famous scholar and historian of the Soviet and Russian oil and gas industries, attributes “the miracle in the oil fields” to a set of innovative practices introduced by two Russian oil companies, Yukos and Sibneft, in the early 2000s, which were consequently adopted and widely applied by the rest of the Russian oil industry. These included a creative merger of sophisticated Western reservoir modelling with low-cost Russian logging data, which allowed the correction of water flooding patterns and well spacing design for Western Siberian fields to increase well productivity greatly while keeping lifting costs at very low levels; much wider use of hydrofracturing (Yukos) and horizontal drilling (Sibneft) to raise well flow rates; and the “re-discovery” of prospective zones between principal reservoirs and horizons left unexplored as a result of distorted incentives during the Soviet time. The main result was the realization that the size of the remaining opportunity in West Siberia had been grossly underestimated because of the Soviet legacy .
The much publicized “exodus” of the Western service companies from Russia in 2022 and its assumed negative effect on Russia’s oil industry performance appears not to have had as big an impact as
expected. The role of (or rather unavailability of) Western technologies for Russia’s oil sector that many market watchers consider to be the crucial factor in determining the future of Russia’s oil needs some further analysis. The overall share of the Western service companies in 2022 was about 20 per cent, with Schlumberger accounting for 8 per cent, according to “Yakov and Partners” research . Some Western service providers like Halliburton decided to leave Russia in 2022, selling its business to Russia-based management teams made of their former employees , but some, like Schlumberger (re¬branded SLB and re-registered in Russia) stayed and expanded their business and revenues . Presently, Russia’s service industry, which has been learning from the best global practices for thirty years, is fully capable of continuing to be successful in conventional oil developments and delivering oil production growth from these assets. A comprehensive review of the situation with Russian oil services performed by Bloomberg in 2023 concluded that the sector has been largely immune to the Western sanctions .
1.6	Russian oil production by company
The past few years have been very dramatic and challenging for Russia’s oil producers. First, the global economic slowdown as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic caused an unprecedented drop in global oil demand in 2020. For the first time since Russia joined OPEC+ it had to introduce drastic production cuts to help stabilize and re-balance the global oil market . Russia has never been a swing producer, but the unprecedented crisis called for unprecedented responses, and in the spring of 2020 Russia committed to reduce its crude oil output by almost 2 mmbpd.
Implementing an abrupt production cut at this scale and within a very short timeframe represented a tremendous technical challenge for the Russian oil companies as they were confronted with the task of delivering 10-20 percent cuts from their upstream portfolios while having to solve a complex problem of optimizing output and trading it off against the risks of permanent loss of production .
The fact that Russian oil companies managed to implement the cut and then to resume increasing production in 2021 and 2022 suggests that very little if any productive capacity has been permanently lost after the wells were shut down and consequently re-started. The sectoral statistics for the “swing period” of 2019-2022 are extremely important for understanding how the Russian oil industry managed to cope with the challenge.
In recent years the state-owned companies have expanded their footprint in Russia. This is especially the case of Rosneft, which in the past decade has acquired Yukos, TNK-BP, and, most recently, Bashneft. Another state-owned company, Gazpromneft, has taken over the Sibneft assets and is developing a portfolio of liquids assets on behalf of its parent company Gazprom. The production data by company reported by Russia’s Ministry of Energy, however, has kept the notions of the previous era, providing separate output data for Bashneft and Slavneft (the latter is jointly managed by Gazpromneft and Rosneft), and also showing oil production by PSA projects (Kharyaga, Sakhalin-1 and Sakhalin-2) as a separate category.
Gazprom and Novatek produce significant amounts of gas condensate. The “other” category consists of about a hundred independents with some companies (for example Tomskneft) and joint ventures (such as Arktikgaz, Salym Petroleum Development) producing very substantial output. (See Table 3).
The first thing to note is that there is a slight discrepancy in the data reported by the Ministry of Energy for 2022, as the sum of the company contributions (535.2 million tonnes) exceeds the reported national total (534 million tonnes). The most likely explanation is that the 2022 production data by company was preliminary, and the final national production number has taken account of losses. This means that the reported production numbers by company might be corrected in the future, but the correction is going to be minor and not material.
Another observation is that the 2022 national output was negatively affected by lower production by PSA operators, which declined 42 per cent or by 7.1 million tonnes year-on-year. The main reason for the drop was the withdrawal of ExxonMobil as the project operator from Sakhalin-1 in March 2022 causing a halt of oil production for many months. In October 2022 the Russian government established a Russian company, managed by Rosneft subsidiary Sakhalinmorneftegaz-shelf, that will own investors' rights in Sakhalin-1 . The new operator started to restore output and managed to bring it back to about 70 per cent of capacity at the beginning of January 2023. It was reported that the oil output at Sakhalin-1 might be fully restored by the end of February 2023 . As a result of Exxon’s exodus from Russia, Sakhalin-1 oil output in 2022 was only 4.6 million tonnes, 59.2 percent lower year-on-year. Assuming a normal operation of the project, Russia’s national output could have been higher by about 5 million tonnes in 2022 suggesting an even stronger bounce back. Rosneft’s report on the operating results in 2022 noted that the company’s total hydrocarbons output in that year was 5.1 mmbpd, but stood at 5.5 mmbpd at year end, most of the difference due to the recovery of output at Sakhalin-1 . The return to normality at Sakhalin-1 in 2023 means that 2023 national production will receive a booster shot from the reinvigorated Sakhalin-1 output.
Robust growth in Gazprom’s liquids production confirms the continuation of the recent trend in rising gas condensate output. Novatek’s liquids output declined, year-on-year, and even more so compared to 2019.
As mentioned earlier, probably the most interesting question to address is what the available statistics tell us about how Russian companies managed to manage the “swing” in production during 2019-2022.
Liquids output by vertically integrated Russian oil companies as a group (VICs) was up 3.3 per cent year-on-year in 2022 and 4.9 per cent below the level of 2019, the year when Russia’s oil production
hit an all-time record of 560 million tonnes. This is a surprisingly good result for the industry because when Russian oil companies were utilizing full productive capacities, from 5 to 7 per cent of the production was represented by marginal wells, operating on the brink of financial profitability. The reasons for keeping these wells operational were license obligations and employment issues rather than economic rationale. To the extent that companies were able to rationalize their portfolios during the crisis by retiring the most marginal assets, the fact that oil production in 2022 was 5 per cent less than in 2019 might be interpreted as a sign of a “leaner” and better positioned industry that has bounced back to the optimum and sustainable level of output.
Another important insight from the dataset in Table 3 is that at first sight the production cut in 2020 was not on a pro rata basis among the Russian VICs. The year-on-year reduction in output in 2020 for VICs as a group was 9.9 per cent. Surgutneftegaz was the only company among the Russian VICs that exactly matched its reduction in output with that number. Lukoil, Tatneft, and Rusneft reduced their output slightly more than average; Bashneft and Slavneft - much more than average, by over 30 per cent; Rosneft - by 7.8 per cent, and Gazprom-neft - by only 0.6 per cent. However, if we use the wider definition of Rosneft that recognizes its ownership of Bashneft and 50 per cent interest in Slavneft, the production cut for the company in 2020 was 10.4 per cent. Gazpromneft was a special case indeed, apparently due to the higher share of condensate in its liquids output. (The agreement between OPEC+ explicitly excluded condensate from the production cut).
One should also use caution interpreting the apparent deterioration of Rosneft output on the basis of Table 3 data. In 2021 Rosneft’s output did not stabilize as was the case with other VICs but continued to fall. At the same time, we see a tremendous increase in production by NNK. The explanation is simple: that year Rosneft sold a collection of its assets (mostly mature and with marginal economics) in the south of Russia, in the Volga region, in Timan-Pechora and in Western Siberia with a combined output of about 12 million tonnes to NNK as part of a portfolio optimization strategy. The effort apparently paid off since the average well flow rates for Rosneft improved and were the highest among the VICs in 2021 (See Table 4).
After adjusting for non-organic factors, Rosneft’s remaining portfolio did not fare too badly. However, Rosneft without Bashneft and 50% of Slavneft registered a production decline in 2022 year-on-year while most of the other Russian producers were demonstrating growth. Adding back production from Bashneft and from the interest in Slavneft to the core Rosneft production, however, is just enough to move gross Rosneft output into positive growth territory in 2022 with a 0.1 percent year-on-year increase.
1.7	Russia’s oil production by region
Unfortunately, the latest available aggregate national statistics on the split between crude oil and condensate output by region from the Ministry of Natural Resources is available only for 2019. On the other hand, these historic statistics can still be very useful since 2019 was the year of the highest liquids production in Russia to date. Clearly, the lion’s share of Russian condensate is produced in YaNAO, which is home to Russia’s super-giant gas fields (See Figure 9).
The combined regional data series for liquids production is currently available through 2022.
Figure 10 demonstrates the incremental change in Russia’s oil and condensate output by region over the decade ending in 2022.
It appears that in the past decade Russian oil companies have achieved good results in managing the decline rates of the so-called “old” oil in Russia, specifically in the Volga region and in Western Siberia, and secondly, that during the past decade most of the “new” oil additions to output were not from high- cost offshore or tight oil formations but from onshore fields on the northern and north-eastern periphery of the developed oil provinces in Western Siberia. These projects are logistically more challenging and more expensive but otherwise are conventional and do not require state-of-the-art Western technological solutions. Clearly, the modest national production increase from 2013 to 2022 happened against the backdrop of declining output in the Novosibirsk, Omsk and Tomsk regions, stable production in Western Siberia and growing output in Krasnoyarskiy krai and Russia’s Far East.
Finally, Table 5 provides an illustration of the “swing” period of 2019-2022 with production.
regards to regional
Thus, while a sharp decline of Russia’s oil output by 2 mmbpd scenario is also plausible: a managed output reduction by 0.5-0.7 mmbpd and stabilization in the near term with subsequent steady growth in the medium term once new giant onshore projects in Russia’s northeast take off.
cannot be ruled out, an alternative
1.8	Vostok Oil: Russia’s flagship new oil project
The key area of future oil production growth for Russia is in the north of Krasnoyarsk kray, where Rosneft has been active for many years. The Vostok Oil project, promoted by Rosneft, is based on the production potential of 13 oil and gas fields on the Taimyr peninsula and in the northern part of Krasnoyarsk kray, some of them already producing, like the fields in the Vankor cluster, and some being new developments in the Payakha cluster (See Figure 11).
According to Rosneft, the Vostok Oil project represents a massive undertaking that is going to lead to significant job creation (the total number of people involved in the work on the project is estimated at 400,000, including 130,000 Rosneft personnel and contractors) and a significant increase in Russia’s GDP as a result of both direct and indirect economic effects. This is a flagship project for Rosneft with confirmed oil reserves of 6 billion tonnes (c.45 billion barrels) and expected combined hydrocarbons production from the project of 50 million tonnes (c. 1 million barrels per day) by the mid-2020s during phase one based on the Vankor and Payakha clusters and at up to 100 million tonnes (2 million barrels per day) during phase two, based on East-Taymyr fields development which is planned by the early 2030s .
Crude from the Vostok Oil fields has a very low sulphur content of 0.01 -0.04%, making it more valuable and more environmentally friendly due to lower SOx emissions when it is refined . To protect the value of this crude quality, which should command a price premium in the market , Rosneft intends to build a dedicated 770-km pipeline from Vankor to a new seaport in Sever (North) near the existing port of Dixon. Rosneft has pledged to deliver up to 30 million tonnes of oil to the Northern Sea Route by 2024, and much more in the longer term . The Vostok Oil project could become a game-changer for the Northern Sea Route, ensuring extremely high levels of shipments in the 2030s and beyond.
However, the project also involves construction of new ships on a grand scale. In total, 50 vessels of different types, including oil tankers, LNG carriers as well as various support ships are expected to work on the project. The orders for 10 Arc-7 ice-class tankers have been placed at the Zvezda shipyard. This could cause delays as sanctions could undermine the ability of Russia to import key equipment from external sources, as has already been seen with the issues surrounding the construction of Arc-7 LNG tankers for Novatek.  Furthermore, shipping oil through the Northern Sea Route involves significant environmental risks, especially in the event of an oil spill, combined with the costs of operating in a very harsh northern climate. As such, although Rosneft has major ambitions for this project, some caution is required when forecasting future output.
1.9	Estimates of Russian oil output to 2030
Taking all the above factors into consideration, it would appear that Russia’s oil industry performance in 2022 and into 2023 has exceeded some earlier pessimistic expectations. In January 2023 Rosstat reported combined crude oil and condensate output of 46 million tonnes, or just below 11 mmbpd. In February 2024 daily production edged up 2 percent over January, to 11.05 mmbpd  and following the cuts agreed with OPEC+ in March Russia has maintained stable output at around 10.5mmbpd (See Figure 12).
The data is taken from the IEA and OPEC estimates because the Russian government decided to suspend releasing oil and gas statistics starting from March 2023 and Q1 2023 until April 1, 2024 . Regarding the available Russian numbers, crude oil production amounted to 9.8 mmbpd and condensate to about 1.1 mmbpd in the first two months of 2023. Russia then announced a 500 kbpd voluntary output cut for crude oil from March 2023 , to be measured against the output in February 2023, and overall production fell to just above 10.5 mmbpd in March, as confirmed by Deputy Prime Minister Novak. 
However, this is clearly just a short-term measure to help balance the oil market and to keep prices higher. Over the long-term, the production potential for the Russian oil sector remains driven by the fundamentals of its oil asset base, the availability of funds for investment, management of the fiscal system and the availability of appropriate technology, all of which have been discussed above.
Unfortunately, a reduction in the availability of data since the start of the war in Ukraine means that the longer-term outlook for Russian oil production is extremely uncertain. The lEA’s World Energy Outlook 2022 postulates a 2 mmbpd drop for Russia’s oil production by 2030 in their STEPs scenario. There is no supporting analysis for this assumption in WEO 2022 other than a short paragraph that states:
“Russia has been under sanctions since 2014 but the financial and technology restrictions bite much harder now. As access to technologies, oil field service expertise, equipment and assets is removed, Russia struggles to maintain production in existing fields and to develop large new fields in the Arctic, tight oil, and other offshore areas” .
However, as has been discussed earlier, this would seem to ignore some important considerations. Firstly, that in the past twenty years Russian oil companies have achieved very good results in managing the decline rates of so-called “old” oil in Russia, and secondly, that during the past decade most “new” oil additions to output were not from offshore or from tight oil formations but from onshore fields on the northern and north-eastern periphery of the developed oil provinces in Western Siberia. Russia may be running out of low-cost oil, but it will be many years until it would have to tap into high- cost oil. Presently, the cost structure for the bulk of Russia’s oil output can be described as a combination of low lifting costs (with the rouble devaluation significantly reducing upstream costs), moderate and price-sensitive tax take, and relatively high logistical costs, resulting in the overall level of costs that are in the middle of the global supply cost curve.
So long as general economic conditions remain favourable, it is possible that Russian oil production will rebound from the declines imposed in 2023 and could continue growing in the medium term, to 2030, as new fields that are ramping up and expected to come onstream more than compensate for the ongoing overall decline from production at existing fields. The important signpost to watch is the progress of Rosneft’s Vostok Oil flagship project, the sheer size of which could ensure future liquids production growth in Russia even if the rate of decline in production from current fields increases. As a result, while a sharp decline of Russia’s oil output by 2 mmbpd cannot be ruled out, alternative scenarios should also be considered, including a managed output reduction by 0.5-0.7 mmbpd and/or the possibility of stabilization in the near term with subsequent steady growth in the medium term once new giant onshore projects in Russia’s northeast take off the ground is entirely plausible.
We have created three scenarios, shown in Figure 13, based on expectations of the performance of the Russian oil sector. In the base case total liquids output averages 10.5mmbpd in 2023 (implying oil production of around 9.2mmbpd) as compliance with the OPEC+ agreement curtails output into 2024. Output then gradually increases back to 10.6mmbpd by the end of the decade as the OPEC+ agreement is unwound, but output fails to fully recover to previous levels above 11mmbpd due to decline in older fields not being matched by new developments.
In the high case, this rebound in production is enhanced by a successful development of Vostok Oil as well as by the addition of a number of smaller satellite fields in existing production regions. It also assumes a slightly slower decline in existing brownfield assets. Total production in 2030 reaches 11.5mmbpd, just marginally above the historic high seen in 2019.
In contrast the low case envisages a continued decline in production from 2023 as the Vostok Oil development takes longer to advance due to financial and technical constraints and is unable to match a slightly faster decline in other brownfield assets. In this case liquids production falls to just over 9mmbpd by 2030, implying crude oil output of around 8mmbpd. This is not quite as dramatic as the IEA forecast in WEO 2022 but does see a more than 2mmbpd fall in production compared with the highs seen in 2019.
1.10	Russian Oil Exports: Current Developments and Outlook
While the future of Russian oil production is clearly an important issue, the critical question for the Russian economy and the wider global oil market is the level of Russian crude oil and oil product exports. Over the past decade Russia has exported 7.4-9.1 million barrels per day (mmbpd) of oil combined (see Figure 14), with 5-6 mmbpd of this being crude oil and the remainder being oil products, in particular gasoline, diesel and fuel oil. The revenues generated from the sale of these hydrocarbons across the world have fluctuated with the oil price but have provided a very significant contribution both to Russian budget revenues and to the country’s GDP.
As a result, when Russia invaded Ukraine in February 2022 there was a political consensus among leaders of those countries opposed to Russia’s actions that this major source of revenues should be targeted with sanctions. However, it was also seen as important to do this without undermining the global oil market. As can be seen from Figure 15 below, since the mid-2000s Russia has accounted for around 12-14% of all oil traded across borders in the global oil market, and its production of 10¬11 mmbpd accounts for approximately 10% of total global oil consumption. Clearly, any sanctions which sought to completely remove this oil from sale on world markets would have caused a dramatic shock to the global oil supply-demand balance and would have led to a sharp increase in the oil price, almost certainly to historic highs. As a result, although there was enthusiasm for action to reduce oil revenues that could fund Russia’s war efforts there was also concern about the wider impact on the global economy.
The importance of oil exports to Russia’s economy can be seen in Figure 16, which shows oil export revenues in US$ and also their share of the income for Russia’s Federal Budget. As can be seen, even in 2020, when the oil price collapsed during the COVID pandemic, oil exports provided around 30% of budget revenues, and this figure recovered to over 40% in 2022. It should also be noted that while the US$ figures provide a good reference point for international comparison, Russia’s budget is actually managed in roubles and therefore the RUR-US$ exchange rate is of enormous relevance to the debate about the income which the Russian government has available for critical expenditures. With the rouble having weakened significantly in 2023, reaching RUR102=US$1 in August before recovering to RUR94=US$1,  the rouble revenues generated for US$ sales of Russian oil have increased sharply. This has helped not only the Russian government but also the profitability of the Russian oil producing companies. Although the wider economic impacts are likely to be negative over time, in the short term at least this means that the Russian budget is more secure than the US$ figures would suggest.
With this context in mind, countries and companies have taken various actions to limit Russia’s access to oil revenues while trying to avoid a sharp rise in global oil prices. Initially, in March 2022, US President Joe Biden announced that the US would embargo imports of Russian crude oil and oil products.  However, while this was an important political statement it had no real physical impact as the US is largely oil independent and only imports small quantities of Russian oil products. More important was the decision of the EU to embargo the import of Russian crude and oil products. This was adopted in June 2022 but took effect from December 5th (for crude oil) and February 5th 2023 (for oil products) in order to allow time for the global market to adjust.  The sanctions ban the import of seaborne Russia oil to EU ports, but pipeline imports via the Druzhba pipeline to countries such as Hungary, Slovakia and the Czech Republic are exempt, although re-sale to other EU countries is banned. Previously
Russia had exported around 3.1mmbpd of crude oil to Europe (0.75mmbpd of that via pipeline) plus around 1.3mmbpd of oil products, and the embargo implied a 90% reduction in oil imports to the EU from that source. The EU and the UK also imposed a ban on the provision of shipping insurance for tankers moving Russian crude in a further attempt to interrupt flows.
Although the EU embargo only came into effect from December 2022, many producing companies, traders, shipping companies and other oil industry players started to self-sanction months in advance in preparation.  However, although this had some impact, in reality it just accelerated the Russian search for alternative markets for its oil and oil products. The graphs in Figure 17 show this process in action. Pipeline crude exports remain stable until the start of 2023, when Germany and Poland cease their purchases, while seaborne exports remain remarkably flat in total, although the mix of destinations changes. The EU-27 is clearly dominant as a destination for Russian crude from 2019 through 2021, but is then replaced by China, Turkey and, most significantly, by India as tankers are re-routed towards the East.
The story for product exports is slightly more diverse, as shown in Figure 18, but again the main decline is in the EU-27, as well as the US, with the replacement markets being China, Turkey, India (albeit to a lesser extent than for crude oil) and other Asian, Middle Eastern and Latin American countries. Once again, though, the overall level of exports hardly moves, demonstrating that the sanctions and embargoes failed to reduce the volume of Russian oil exports in a significant way.
To an extent this outcome did not represent a failure of western sanctions policy because it was always the intention to avoid disruption to the global oil market. However, in order to undermine revenues arriving in Russia that could be used to finance the war effort it therefore became necessary to limit the price paid for Russian oil. The G7 group of countries, plus a coalition of countries such as Australia and EU member states, resolved to address this issue by imposing a price cap of $60 per barrel on Russian crude oil and $100 on Russian oil products based on the FOB price in the Baltic or Black Seas. The cap was introduced to coincide with the EU embargoes, namely 5th December 2022 for crude and 5th February 2023 for oil products. 
As can be seen in Figure 19, the price of the Russian Urals blend that is assessed on an FOB basis at Primorsk in the Baltic Sea was below the price cap when it was introduced in December 2022. This was because a large differential had opened up between the price quotations of Urals by Argus and the globally traded Brent benchmark price, due to the method of calculating the cost of freight and insurance in the absence of actual sales of Urals crude in Northwestern Europe. As can be seen from Figure 19, in late 2022 and early 2023 this differential between Brent and Urals quotations reached as much as $40 per barrel due to the extremely high risk premia assumed in the calculation, although it has now fallen back to around $10-15 per barrel. Clearly, Russia was forced to offer price discounts in order to find new buyers of its oil, but it seems unlikely that the actual price discount that the buyers of the Russian crude could obtain was as high as $40/bbl. Nevertheless, while the information about the price of Urals in the actual sales that had migrated to Asia was not readily available, the synthetic calculation of the Urals price by Argus at a level below the price cap allowed for the continued purchase of Russian crude. This is because anyone involved in the trade of Russian oil is mandated to ensure that the hydrocarbons have been sold at below $60 per barrel, and as long as they have been assured that this is the case then they can still be involved in the trading and delivery process. Once the price assessment is above $60 per barrel, anyone involved with the purchase, transport, insurance or financing of the trade in Russian crude can only continue to facilitate delivery to ports in countries without a specific embargo on physical volumes (for example trade to China but not to the EU-27) and can make a significant margin on the provision of the service.
As noted above, the biggest beneficiary of this new trade at discounted prices has been India. As the country’s foreign minister noted in November 2022 in reference to the increased purchase of oil from Russia, “Russia has been a steady and time-tested partner...if it works to my advantage, I would like to keep that going.”  As can be seen in Figure 20, this strategy has led to a marked shift in India’s oil import geography, with Russia accounting for as much as 40% of total imports in some months in 2023, while other suppliers such as the UAE, Iraq and Saudi Arabia have seen their shares decline. According to some commentators India may now have reached a limit of its exposure to Russian crude,  but there is no immediate sign of a return to previous low levels.
While the obvious logic for increased Indian purchases of Russian oil is shown in Figure 19 by the large discount or Urals Blend to Brent, it needs to be remembered that this is based on the FOB price in the Baltic Sea. The discount has not only offered cheap oil to India but has also opened a huge margin to be made in the provision of transport and ancillary services to deliver the oil from northern Europe to Southern Asia. Figure 21 compares the delivered price of Russian oil to the west coast of India with the FOB price at Primorsk during 2023 and shows that although the differential has narrowed significantly over the last eight months the margin has ranged from a high of around $23 per barrel to the current $8 per barrel. This has tempted traders and tanker owners to get involved with the trade in Russian crude not only to India but also to other Asian destinations where similar margins have been on offer and has helped to facilitate the liquidity of the global oil market. This has underpinned the decline in the oil price from its high of over $122 per barrel in May 2022 to the current level of around $84 per barrel. 
The flow of Russian oil has not only been made possible by price discounts and trading opportunities though. A number of companies have allegedly been involved in sanctions-busting activities, with the development of a “shadow” tanker fleet registered in non-sanctioning countries and insured by a variety of obscure financial entities the most well-reported.  Other options, such as the re-labelling of cargoes, trans-shipment and re-sale of oil, refining of Russian oil and re-delivery as oil products and the use of tankers that leave port without a destination have all been highlighted as means of avoiding embargoes and profiting from the large margins on offer.  Although many countries are now clamping down on the use of ageing and unregistered vessels, with a number now being refused entry to ports on safety grounds,  it would still appear that even some countries that continue to sanction Russia are prepared to see its crude and oil products retain a place in the world oil market in order to maintain the stability of the oil price. 
One final point is worth noting on the price for Russian crude exports. The price cap only applies to oil traded out of European Russia, primarily in the Baltic Sea, and so it does not affect the price of Russian oil exported from the east of the country at Kozmino, where oil from the ESPO (East Siberia Pacific Ocean) pipeline is delivered for onward delivery via tanker to Asian markets. Figure 22 shows the spread between Urals Blend and the ESPO Blend sold into Asia, and again the differential has closed over the course of 2023 from a high of over $30 at the start of the year to around $6.50 in August 2023. This narrowing of discounts highlights the fact that the price of Urals Blend has risen sharply over the past few months and is now trading above the G7 $60 per barrel cap. This has caused potential issues for banks, oil traders, insurance companies and tanker owners who are understandably nervous about angering the US authorities by breaking the price cap rules. However, in another demonstration of the double-edged nature of the sanctions, the US government has indicated that it will be applying “soft touch” enforcement of the rules via conversations with service providers rather than harsh implementation of the sanctions, in order to avoid “creating ripples in a market that could send rising global oil prices higher.” 
1.11	The Outlook
Given all the issues discussed above, and in particular the balance which countries sanctioning Russia are trying to make between limiting Russia’s oil revenues while keeping its oil on the global market to avoid any sharp price spikes, it would seem reasonable to assume that the volumes of oil and oil products leaving Russia will remain relatively stable for the foreseeable future. Some gradual decline might be expected in the medium term if and when oil production goes into gradual decline, as discussed earlier in this paper, and over the longer term the impact of the energy transition on global oil demand could also see Russian exports decline as the economics deteriorate. In the short-term though (to 2030) it would seem likely that exports will remain around current levels. The one caveat to this outlook in the short term is the impact of agreements made with the OPEC+ group to constrain production, which could have a knock-on impact on exports. The agreement to cut production by 500 kbpd in March and to reduce exports of crude oil and oil products by a similar amount from September has caused exports to slow, and indeed on 21st September Russia banned all gasoline and diesel exports in order to re-balance its domestic market and keep prices down.  However, this is likely to be a short-term phenomenon and should not change the longer-term outlook for overall exports.
Control of Russian revenues will therefore come via the price cap, which has been reasonably effective to date but where cracks already seem to be appearing. As seen in figure 19, Urals Blend has been trading above $60, and although the US has stepped in to caution market participants not to deal in Russian oil above this level, it would seem reasonable to surmise that, as with many sanctions’ programmes, enforcement will weaken over time. In addition, it would also appear that Russian companies and other “shadow” organisations are making money in the margin between the capped FOB price at Primorsk and the delivered price in non-sanctioning countries such as India. In addition, Russian oil not delivered out of non-European regions (especially in the East) can avoid the cap and any embargoes altogether. As such, while it would seem reasonable to assume a continued discount for Russian crude and product exports over the rest of this decade, it is likely that the discount will narrow (as we have already seen in 2023) and may disappear altogether.
